Section: A queueing model with 2 consecutive buffer centres (#6)
11michalis11/ED-EMS-game-paper: sections/queueing_model/main.tex

\section{A queueing model with 2 consecutive buffer centres}

% TODO: If this is to be one paper maybe the first two paragraphs do not need to
% include so much details or even better omit some of the details in the game
% overview section.
In this section, a more in-depth explanation of the queueing model shown in 
figure \ref{fig:diagram_of_queueing_system} will be given.
This is a queuing model that consists of two waiting spaces, one for each type

> of patient.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of individual.
```

        \Lambda, & \textbf{if } (u_i, v_i) - (u_j, v_j) = (0,-1) \textbf{ and } 
        v_i < \text{t} \\
        \lambda_1, & \textbf{if } (u_i, v_i) - (u_j, v_j) = (0,-1) 
        \textbf{ and } v_i \geq \text{t} \\
        \lambda_2, & \textbf{if } (u_i, v_i) - (u_j, v_j) = (-1,0) \\
        v_i \mu, & \textbf{if } (u_i, v_i) - (u_j, v_j) = (0,1) \textbf{ and } 
        v_i \leq C \textbf{ or} \\ & \hspace{0.37cm}(u_i, v_i) - (u_j, v_j) = 
        (1,0) \textbf{ and } v_i = T \leq C \\
        C \mu, & \textbf{if } (u_i, v_i) - (u_j, v_j) = (0,1) \textbf{ and } 
        v_i > C 
        \textbf{ or} \\ & \hspace{0.37cm}(u_i, v_i) - (u_j, v_j) = (1,0) 
        \textbf{ and } v_i = T > C\\
        -\sum_{j=1}^{|Q|}{Q_{ij}} & \textbf{if } i = j \\
        0, & \textbf{otherwise}
    \end{cases}
\end{equation}

Note that \(\Lambda\) here denotes the overall arrival rate in the model by both 
classes of individuals (i.e. \(\Lambda = \lambda_1 + \lambda_2\)). 
A visualisation of how the transition rates relate to the states of the model 
can be seen in the general Markov chain model shown in figure 
\ref{fig:general-markov-model}.

\input{imgs/general_markov_model/main.tex}

> In order to acquire an exact solution of the problem a slight adjustment needs 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to consider this model numerically an adjustment needs 
```

> to be considered. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to be made. 
```

The problem defined above assumes no upper boundary to the number of individuals 
that can wait for service or for the ones that are blocked in the buffer centre. 

> Therefore, a different state space \( \tilde S \) needs to be constructed where 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, a different state space \( \tilde S \) is constructed where 
```

> Therefore, a different state space \( \tilde S \) needs to be constructed where 
> \( \tilde S \subseteq S \) and there is a maximum allowed number of people \(N\) 
> that can be in the system and a maximum allowed number of people \(M\) that can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, a different state space \( \tilde S \) needs to be constructed where 
\( \tilde S \subseteq S \) and there is a maximum allowed number of individuals \(N\) 
that can be in the system and a maximum allowed number of individuals \(M\) that can
```

\section{A queueing model with 2 consecutive buffer centres}

% TODO: If this is to be one paper maybe the first two paragraphs do not need to
% include so much details or even better omit some of the details in the game
% overview section.
In this section, a more in-depth explanation of the queueing model shown in 
figure \ref{fig:diagram_of_queueing_system} will be given.
This is a queuing model that consists of two waiting spaces, one for each type
of patient.

The model consists of two types of individuals; class 1 and class 2.
Class 1 individuals arrive instantly at waiting zone 1 and proceed to wait to
receive their service. 
Class 2 individuals arrive at waiting zone 2 and wait there until they are 

> allowed to move to waiting zone 1. 

Reviewer: Should we just do away with the word `Class`?

```suggestion
The model consists of two types of individuals.
Individuals of the first type arrive at waiting zone 1 and proceed to wait to
receive their service. 
Individuals of the second type arrive at waiting zone 2 and wait there until they are 
allowed to move to waiting zone 1. 
```

Reviewer 2: Any particular reason why we should? Is it because classes in queueing models are usually used to distinguish priority levels?

> They are allowed to proceed to the next waiting zone only when the number of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They are allowed to proceed only when the number of 
```

> individuals in the next system (in waiting zone 1 and in service) is less than a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
individuals in waiting zone 1 \textbf{and} in service is less than a 
```

pre-determined threshold \(T\).

> When the threshold is reached, all class 2 individuals that arrive will remain 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the number of individuals is equal to or exceeds this threshold, all second type individuals that arrive will remain 
```

> \textit{``blocked''} in the buffer centre until the number of people in the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\textit{``blocked''} in waiting zone 1 until the number of people in the 
```

system is reduced below \(T\). 
This is shown diagrammatically in figure \ref{fig:diagram_of_queueing_system}.
The parameters of the described queueing model are:

\begin{itemize}
    \item \(\lambda_1\): The arrival rate of class 1 individuals

>     \item \(\lambda_2\): The arrival rate of class 2 individuals

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \item \(\lambda_i\): The arrival rate of individuals of type \(i\in\{1, 2\}\)
```

    \item \(\mu\): The service rate for individuals receiving service in waiting 

>     zone 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \item \(\mu\): The service rate for individuals receiving service
```

    \item \(C\): The number of servers

>     \item \(T\): The threshold where class 2 individuals will start being blocked 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \item \(T\): The threshold at which individuals of the second type are blocked
```

\end{itemize}

In order to model such queueing system a Markov chain model was used.
Markov chains are a special kind of memoryless stochastic systems where the 
outcome of the next iteration depends only on the current state
~\cite{kemeny1976markov}. 
The way such models are formulated is through a directed graph where each vertex
is consider a state of the system and each edge represents the transition rate

> between its two linking vertices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Under the assumption that all rates (arrival and service) are Markovian the queuing system corresponds to a Markov chain~\cite{kemeny1976markov}.
```

The states of the Markov chain are denoted by \((u,v)\) where:

\begin{itemize}
    \item \(u\) = number of individuals blocked

>     \item \(v\) = number of individuals either in waiting zone 1 or in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \item \(u\) is the number of individuals blocked
    \item \(v\) is the number of individuals either in waiting zone 1 or in the
```

    service centre
\end{itemize}

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The state space of the Markov chain \(S\) is defined as the union between
\(S_1\) and \(S_2\), where \(S_1\) represents the set of states where the total 
number of individuals is less than \(T\) and \(S_2\) the set of states where the

> total number of individuals is greater than \(T\). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We denote the state space of the Markov chain as  \(S=S(T)\) which can be written as the disjoint union~\ref{eqn:definition_of_S_as_disjoint_union}.
```

\begin{align}

>     S(T) =& S_1(T) \cup S_2(T) \text{ where:} \nonumber \\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    S(T) =& S_1(T) \cup S_2(T) \text{ where:} \label{eqn:definition_of_S_as_disjoint_union} \\
```

    S_1(T) =& \left\{(0, v)\in\mathbb{N}_0^2 \; | \; v < T \right\} 
    \label{eq:state_space} \\
    S_2(T) =& \{(u, v)\in\mathbb{N}_0^2 \; | \; v \geq T \} \nonumber

> \end{align}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
\end{align}

\(S_1\) represents the set of states where the total 
number of individuals is less than \(T\) and \(S_2\) the set of states where the
total number of individuals is greater or equal to \(T\). 
```

> The transition matrix \(Q\) of the Markov chain consists of the transition rates

Reviewer: If we go with `\(Q\)` then we need to go with `\(Q_{ij}\)`.

Can you change all `q_{...}` to `Q_{...}`

Will catch a few here as I go.

Reviewer 2: Yeah don't know why I used `q_{i, j}` in the first place

between the numerous states of the model. Every entry \( q_{i,j} = 
q_{(u_i, v_i),(u_j, v_j)} \) represents the transition rate from state 
\( i = (u_i, v_i) \) to state \( j = (u_j , v_j) \) for all 
\( (u_i, v_i), (u_j, v_j) \in S \).
The entries of \(Q\) can be calculated using the state-mapping function 

> described in \ref{eq:markov_transition_rate}: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
between the numerous states of the model. For a given ordering of \(S\), every entry \( Q_{ij} = 
Q_{(u_i, v_i),(u_j, v_j)} \) represents the transition rate from the \(i^{\text{th}}\) state 
\((u_i, v_i) \) to the \(j^{\text{th}}\) state \( (u_j , v_j) \) for all 
\( (u_i, v_i), (u_j, v_j) \in S \).
\(Q\) is given in~\ref{eq:markov_transition_rate}.
```

Note when you have just got two single letters as indicates you don't need to use a `,` so:

- `Q_{ij}` 👍  but `Q_{i,j}` 👎 
- `Q_{i + 1, j} :+1:

Reviewer 2: Had no idea there's convention for this. Good to know 👍

\begin{equation} \label{eq:markov_transition_rate}

>     q_{i, j} = 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Q_{i, j} = 
```

        \lambda_1, & \textbf{if } (u_i, v_i) - (u_j, v_j) = (0,-1) 
        \textbf{ and } v_i \geq \text{t} \\
        \lambda_2, & \textbf{if } (u_i, v_i) - (u_j, v_j) = (-1,0) \\
        v_i \mu, & \textbf{if } (u_i, v_i) - (u_j, v_j) = (0,1) \textbf{ and } 
        v_i \leq C \textbf{ or} \\ & \hspace{0.37cm}(u_i, v_i) - (u_j, v_j) = 
        (1,0) \textbf{ and } v_i = T \leq C \\
        C \mu, & \textbf{if } (u_i, v_i) - (u_j, v_j) = (0,1) \textbf{ and } 
        v_i > C 
        \textbf{ or} \\ & \hspace{0.37cm}(u_i, v_i) - (u_j, v_j) = (1,0) 
        \textbf{ and } v_i = T > C\\
        -\sum_{j=1}^{|Q|}{q_{i,j}} & \textbf{if } i = j \\
        0, & \textbf{otherwise}
    \end{cases}
\end{equation}

Note that \(\Lambda\) here denotes the overall arrival rate in the model by both 
classes of individuals (i.e. \(\Lambda = \lambda_1 + \lambda_2\)). 
A visualisation of how the transition rates relate to the states of the model 
can be seen in the general Markov chain model shown in figure 
\ref{fig:general-markov-model}.

\input{sections/queueing_model/general_markov_model/main.tex}

In order to acquire an exact solution of the problem a slight adjustment needs to 

> be considered. 

Reviewer: You have not described the problem yet. Here you need to describe the steady state vector.

Reviewer 2: Yeah that makes sense. I properly define the steady state vector in `performance_measures/main.tex` but it makes more sense to have it here instead. Will do 👍
